Power is different. Uh power uh in the
hands of a few people uh means that
other people don't have it. Power is a
zero someum game.
This is the interview. I'm David Maresy
and this week I'm speaking with Robert
Rich. Rich served as the labor secretary
under Bill Clinton. He also had a long
teaching career. He recently retired
from UC Berkeley and the end of his
career is the subject of a new
documentary called The Last Class.
>> Well, most of you say that you are
pessimistic about the future, America
and the world. Although you are
optimistic about your own future,
pessimism is fine.
Cynicism is not.
>> Raj's work focuses on the problem of
economic inequality and beyond the
classroom. And that's a subject that
he's taken on in a bunch of books,
films, and now on social media, where
he's become sort of a star among online
progressives.
>> The world's five richest men have
doubled their fortune since 2020.
>> He has a new memoir coming up short in
which he argues that his generation
failed to strengthen democracy and help
those who need it most. So, I wanted to
speak with Rich to see how he
understands this moment and also to
learn what he thinks he could have done
differently. Here's my conversation with
Robert Rich.
>> Thank you for taking the time to speak
with me. I appreciate it.
>> Well, I appreciate your time as well.
>> So, uh, to start, the title of your
memoir, Coming Up Short, is, you know, a
pun. It's upon the fact that you're
short. But then of course it also refers
to your argument that your generation,
the baby boomers, failed to strengthen
democracy, failed to reduce economic
inequality, and generally as you put it,
failed to contain the bullies. So
without giving away the whole book, what
went wrong?
I think we took for granted, David, a
great deal of what our parents and their
parents bequeathed to us. I was born in
1946,
as was George W. Bush and Bill Clinton
uh and Donald Trump. But in 1946 uh that
so-called greatest generation
gave us not only peace and prosperity
but the largest middle class the world
had ever seen. Uh and what I try to
understand is how we ended up with
Donald Trump. Donald Trump I think is
the consequence not the cause of what we
are now experiencing. He is the
culmination
of at least 50 years of a certain kind
of neglect, a certain kind of failure.
Uh despite what our
parents gave us, bequeathed to our
generation. Uh we did not appreciate it.
We did not build on it adequately. And I
say this very personally because this is
a story of my life as well. I was part
of this failure. Um it is a reckoning
that I feel is
deeply
personal.
How useful or explanatory is the
generational frame? Because alongside
the shortcomings, baby boomers helped
reduce racial discrimination,
grew the environmental movement,
bolstered feminism and gay rights, you
helped to shepherd along giant
technological advance. So is it really
accurate to to to sort of describe the
problem as a generational failure or is
the issue more that you know
conservative politics which plenty of
baby boomers themselves have always held
has won some pretty significant
victories over the last 50 years? Well,
it's not fair to blame a generation
certainly, and I try not to in the book,
but I think it is fair to say that over
the last 50, 60, well, I'm now 70 going
on 79 years old, uh there has been in
America a failure to appreciate the
importance of democracy. Uh the
importance of holding back big money,
the moneyed interests. uh because as
inequality has got worse and worse and
the the richer Americans have become far
richer uh the poorer Americans have
become poorer. Uh the middle class has
by many measures shrunk. Uh that is an
open invitation for corruption. Uh we
see more and more big money
undermining our democratic institutions.
we we could not have stayed on the path
we were on even if Trump hadn't come
along. Uh we were opening ourselves to
if not a demagogue then something like a
demagogue. uh because so many people
became so angry and frustrated and
so many were convinced even before Trump
that the system was rigged against them
uh that uh
America was was ripe for what happened.
I I don't want to minimize the the good
things that have happened over the past
70 years obviously
uh but
the fact of the matter is that we ended
up with a very large number of Americans
who are deeply distraught who feel that
the American system and the promise of
America
uh was a sham. I I think of undergirling
a lot of the um problems that you've
pointed to is this issue of economic
inequality which has really been a
recurring issue for you for decades now.
It's it's fair to say. Um you know I
think people in the abstract know have
some sense of what economic inequality
means but can you make it a little bit
more concrete for me? What are you
referring to? I'm talking about um the
extraordinary
uh inequalities of not just income and
wealth. That's the surface. Uh but the
inequalities that stem from inequalities
of income and wealth, inequalities of
access uh to uh a good education, um
racial inequalities, class inequalities.
We are now seeing inequalities having to
do with uh who is here on the basis of
uh their citizenship. But basically I
see bullying as uh central to
um inequality getting out of control.
That is certain people have control over
other people u in ways that enable them
to to brutalize those people. Um, and
here I would include uh a lot of the
employers that I began to see as I was
labor secretary. Uh, I'd include uh men
who have uh brutalized and exploited
women. Um, and again I I go back to race
and ethnicity um that have been so
central to the brutality um in America
and our own and our own brutal history.
Uh this is this all stems David from
inequality. But when you when inequality
uh gets out of control as it has, we
eventually get a bully in chief named
Donald Trump. Can you tell me why um
bullies and bullying are uh
why they they have such heat for you?
Well, I am very short. I've never
reached um quite uh over 4'11.
Um and I've always been short. Um, when
I was a kid in school, uh, in
kindergarten, first grade, I was
bullied, made fun of, humiliated, uh, to
the point where I really feared going to
school. Now, I'm not alone in that.
Bullying happens
in in every elementary school, I'm sure,
in in America, and many kids are
bullied. Uh I felt though that my
bullying and the bullying that is my the
bullying of me
uh made me so deeply afraid
uh in so many aspects of my early life.
Uh it undermined my my sense of
personal security and selfworth. It
wasn't until I had a wonderful teacher
in third grade um that I learned that I
I actually might have something to
contribute. I might be worth some
something uh not in a grandiose societal
way. I just mean in terms of a a very
tiny little um eight-year-old way. And
then um
I I found that if I had a couple of
older boys to protect me from the
bullies, that would that would help.
People I I I just sort of latched on to
because I I knew that they were kind.
Um for somebody like me at the age of
five or six or seven or eight, uh
kindness in an older boy was was really
something that I recognized very
quickly. One of those boys
>> who was one of my protectors
uh was named Mickey. I didn't know his
last name or you know as a little boy. I
just knew him as Mickey with a sailor's
cap and a wonderful smile. I I don't
recall him ever actually interceding on
my my behalf. Uh but he he just exuded a
kindness. Right.
>> People around him uh felt his kindness.
He he uh he changed the atmosphere, if
you will, around him. Long story short,
Mickey was a civil rights worker. He was
his full name was Michael Schwerner,
>> and he along with two other civil rights
workers were brutally murdered the
summer of 1964 as I entered college. I
had lost track of Mickey entirely by
that time. They were they were part of
Freedom Summer.
And when I heard that the person who had
protected me from the bullies
uh had been murdered by the Ku Klux
Clan, I think in many ways it changed my
life.
It made me see bullying
not just in terms of the toughs in my
elementary school, but in terms of
power, the powerful against the
powerless.
people who
desperately needed protection
from those who abused their power. Now,
let me say in any society, there are
always going to be the more powerful and
less powerful. There always there's
always going to be inequality. Some
inequality is not bad. In fact, it may
be necessary to give people uh the
appropriate incentives to work hard and
innovate. But at some point we tip over
into a culture that is a brutal culture.
Uh, and that's
what I discovered particularly when I
was Secretary of Labor when I looked at
what was happening out in America
at at the people who were losing jobs or
losing good jobs um at the decline of
unionized jobs which were by definition
good jobs. I mean, it's not American
manufacturing that creates good jobs.
It's that they they were unionized jobs.
Um uh I began to uh see that economic
bullying
uh was a central character or a central
aspect of uh the late
20th early 21st century America.
>> Did did you ever feel like you came up
with a um reliable strategy for dealing
with bullies? So that's sort of the the
personal side of the question. And then
in a in a bigger picture sense, are
there reliable strategies for dealing
with economic bullies?
>> Well, I felt and I personally had come
up with a good strategy. That was my my
own my own protection racket,
>> right?
>> You know, the the the the older boys.
But your larger question has to do with
what we do about the economic bullying,
what we do about the bullying of in our
society.
If you're an average working person uh
today, um you are extraordinarily
vulnerable. I mean, nobody is protecting
you. I think this is one of the
attractions uh that Donald Trump um
wittingly or unwittingly presented in
2016 and continues to present. He um has
in effect provided an explanation
uh for people who have been economically
and socially uh brutalized and bullied.
Uh an explanation for what has happened
to them. An explanation that is by the
way completely wrong. uh you know has to
do with immigrants and the deep state uh
and uh transgender
uh people and and you know the the rest
of the the the the boogeyman boogeymen
uh that he has created. And part of the
book is my attempt uh failing uh so far
uh to help the Democrats uh or at least
progressives or anybody politically to
to see that the way forward uh is to
talk truthfully about why it is that so
many people are uh are powerless and
bullied and and feel so vulnerable and
and and so angry.
What's your diagnosis for why Democrats
have struggled so mightily with uh
coming up with a story that to help them
gain traction?
I think Democrats uh some Democrats uh
don't want to tell the true story of
concentrated wealth and power because
they are drinking at the same trough as
Republicans in terms of their campaigns.
This quandry has been growing since I um
was in my 20s, you know, beginning to
watch uh money and politics uh and the
uh fouian bargain that the Democrats
were making. The Democrats want to be on
the side of of social justice and and
fairness and equal opportunity uh and
political equality. Um, and yet, uh,
some Democrats, I don't want to tar with
too broad a brush here, but some
Democrat Democrats are taking money, uh,
and don't want to bite the hands that
feed them. And I've seen it personally.
I've seen it, you know, when I was at
the Federal Trade Commission. Uh, I saw
it when I was at the Justice Department,
uh, working in the
Ford administration. I saw it, uh, very
close up when I was in the Clinton
administration.
uh and then uh
at a distance when I was providing some
advice to uh Barack Obama. Uh, one of
the frustrating things about writing
this book
>> uh and and reliving these years is that
I um I I I I came across memos and
letters and videos of me at that time
repeatingly saying over and over again,
you know, like a broken record uh if we
are if we stay on this path, we are
going to find ourselves in the not too
distant future with a demagogue and our
democracy is going to be threatened. Is
there anything you could have done to
have been uh more effective in in
delivering the message that that you
just outlined? Because if you you know
if you were in the halls of power be
being able to talk to the people with
power, do you ever think that oh if I
had done X differently or made Y move
differently? Um do those thoughts arise?
>> I often think about that.
>> Yeah. uh uh and uh I I tell myself that
if I had been more cunning, wiser, more
aggressive, more articulate, u maybe I
could have um been more effective. Um uh
take um my
my my my arguments be um in the Clinton
administration with Bob Rubin uh who
incidentally is a is a delightful man
and
>> he was the Treasury Secretary just for
people.
>> He was the Treasury Secretary under the
Clinton under under Bill Clinton. Um he
was from Wall Street. Uh and he had good
arguments. Um, and I understood his
arguments, but he was uh in he was
wrong. I mean, let's I mean, he he just
was was wrong. He was wrong about uh
globalization. He was wrong about
deregulation of finance. He was wrong
about uh so many things. And I uh in
retrospect, it's easy to say, but at the
time, I couldn't get as far as I wanted.
I couldn't I could not bust through. Um
in fact, I
I I'm so short that I would try to find
out when Bill Clinton's limo was heading
out of the White House because I'm was
the only one who could fit in the jump
seat right across from where Bill
Clinton was was sitting and I'd I'd run
and and and get into his his limo and
and have maybe five minutes with him
just alone uh to try to make my case.
Um, and I think back on those instances
and worry that I didn't make it as
effectively as I could have. And if if
um, as you say, the you know, the
Democrats or some Democrats are drinking
from the same uh, trough as the
Republicans. uh
in conjunction with the fact that you
know sort of the the democratic uh
growth in terms of of voters you know it
it's connected to the to the more
wealthy more educated pockets of the
country. Um h so given those those
factors um how how would Democrats then
sort of authentically
find common ground with with working
people who are struggling.
Democrats would point to
uh the
large corporations in this country um to
their monopolistic practices, their
anti- labor practices, uh to uh all
sorts of things that they are doing that
are keeping the rest of America
poorer.
um Democrats would do what Bernie
Sanders and AOC and Elizabeth Warren uh
have done quite effectively. It strikes
me as as a little bit crazy that the
Democrats are divided between the the
establishment Democrats or or the
Democrats who I call corporate Democrats
uh and uh the progressive Democrats. Why
aren't all Democrats progressive
Democrats? I mean, who who in the world
needs corporate Democrats when you have
a Republican party uh that is pretty
good at representing uh big corporations
uh even though it now has a facade of of
populism. Surely there there are those
on the left who could be, you know,
friendly or friendlier to uh big
business and and at the same time hold
uh sort of left-leaning um social
values. Um,
>> yeah.
>> Dave, David, you took you talk about,
and you're not alone, left and right.
>> Yeah.
>> Um,
>> yeah.
>> I
I don't any longer know exactly what
those terms mean. I mean, you know, u
I'm asked very often, should the
Democrats move to the center? I don't
even know what the center is. Where is
this where is the center between between
democracy and dictatorship, which is
what we're really now facing? uh there
is no center.
>> Maybe a working definition of the center
um could be connected to to a term that
you uh have used a lot which is uh sort
of that which best serves the common
good.
Yes, we don't talk about the common good
nearly enough. Um Ian Rand and others uh
thought it was a recipe for fascism or
socialism or some other ism. But the
fact of the matter is that there there
certainly is a common good uh and the
most the core of that common good uh is
our constitution, the rule of law uh the
the the processes uh uh and institutions
of a democracy. Uh if we don't believe
in any of this then how in the world can
we ever achieve a common good? Do you
see hope or or uh sort of uh positive
energy in in figures like AOC or maybe
Zoron Manni in in New York who who I I
assume are the kind of progressive
Democrats that that uh you support?
>> I I do see them as the future as a as
the future of the Democratic Party. uh
assuming that they appeal to working
people. Um
my fear
>> Mhm.
uh is that uh they
will not or at least that they will be
carried um in the currents of um
of progressive politics
uh which right now are overwhelmingly
uh college graduates uh and and
uh urban and coastal centers.
Uh that's not bad, but you have to be
inclusive. Uh you have to include uh the
working class and the poor. And it
should be easy to do now. Uh when you
see
you you see the billionaires standing
there in front of Trump at his
inauguration. Uh people who are not just
billionaires, they are
multi-billionaires. They are hundred
billionaires. We don't even have terms
for these billionaires any longer. Um,
I'm just, you know, you're
pretty popular on uh on Tik Tok, on uh
Instagram. You you uh have a popular
Substack. Uh uh do you have a sense of
what the demographics of your audience
are?
>> No. Uh I don't. Um, but I
I'm I'm I'm kind of always worried that
I'm not getting through to the people
who I would like to get through to. Um,
that is I I I worry that I'm not getting
through to
uh working-class people who feel
disenfranchised and alienated uh from
the American system. What's the best way
of of of actually reaching these people?
uh you know Fox News and Newsmax and
these other
entities um they play upon and exploit
the anger that was already there. I go
into this in some detail in the book
because Rush Limbbo uh and Roger Als
were working contempor contemporaneously
with me. I I had interactions uh
indirectly with Rush Limba and and
certainly directly with Roger Als. Uh
and I know what they were doing. I know
why they were doing it. I talked to
Roger Als about what he wanted to
achieve with Fox News. Uh I mean it was
it was very clear to me that he was
building upon uh discontent and anger
that he saw there as was uh him Rush
Limbbo before him. these these
and I I don't want to suggest David that
it was purely cynical on their parts. Um
maybe they they they believed in what
they were doing but from what I saw from
my conversations particularly uh again I
never talked to Russell but I I did talk
to Roger
uh it seemed to be uh very cynical
indeed. Is is there anything you you
know minus the cynicism, is there
anything you could have learned from how
Roger Als and and Rush Limbaugh
communicate? Because, you know, I just
saw the other day someone sent to me a a
Tik Tok video of you doing a little
shimmy uh
while uh uh to big band music uh or big
band- like music while sort of, you
know, political slogans popped up on the
screen. I thought, well, that's cute.
Well, here's what I what I did learn.
>> Yeah. Did I do the show? Yeah.
>> No, I didn't learn dancing from Rush
Limbbo or Roger Els, but I did learn
that that that humor is very important.
Uh people love humor. Uh also uh
what Rush Limbbo Limbbo and also Roger
Els understood is that satire uh is is
critically important. I don't really do
that. I don't want to be mean-spirited.
And sometimes satire, the line, the line
between satire and mean-spiritedness is
very very very
uh vague and and you can lose sight of
uh yourself very easily um in terms of
not going over that line. Um but u they
did it well. They understood satire. Um,
you know, in addition to to the the
memoir, you're also the subject of a uh
of a documentary that's um called the
the last class, which is about sort of
the the runup to your last class at uh
at Berkeley. Um a and you know, you you
taught at different universities for 40
some 40ome years. Uh and
are there ways in which your students
changed any of your fundamental ideas or
beliefs?
It was very important
and became more and more important over
the 42 or 43 years I taught uh not to
give students my opinions.
>> Um it became because they could always
read my books, they could always find my
opinions. I wanted them to do the work.
I I I asked them sincerely to find
people who disagreed with them and told
them over and over again that this is
the best way of learning because the
worst kind of learning environment is is
a learning environment in which
everybody agrees politically or
everybody has the same basic views or
there is an overwhelming uh consensus
culturally or or in terms of economics
or politics. uh because then you you you
just don't have anybody to to headbang
against. You don't have any u any
contrasting viewpoints. Uh and at the
places some of the places I've taught, I
mean Harvard and and Brandeise and
certainly Berkeley, that is one of the
biggest obstacles to learning.
>> Well, yeah. You know, it's it's funny. I
went um just out of curiosity, I went on
uh was it called ratemyprofessor.com and
looked up what students had to say about
you. Uh and uh I I I will say that I
think uh uh the vast majority of the
evaluations that were submitted to that
website were uh extremely positive, but
there were a small handful of students
who who said things to the effect of
like, you know, the the professor's
class is great if you only want to hear
a left-wing perspective on on the
issues. Um, which kind of echoes with
what you were just saying about uh the
problem of of consensus, which of course
is is also a uh sort of a hot button
issue uh for conservative politicians
right now who who talk about there
needing to be more ideological balance
in academia. Um, how would the problem
of of of
detrimental
ideological consensus be addressed in
academia?
Well, a very good and current question.
Um, the attacks that Republicans are now
making on Harvard and other
so-called bastions of liberalism
um are centered on exactly that
question. J. D. Vance when he was even
before he became vice president was
making similar attacks on prestigious
institutions even Yale where he went to
law school. Uh I I think that that has
got to be that particular issue has got
to be
uh viewed
a little bit more with a little bit more
specificity.
um that is
there there is a larger kind of cultural
set of assumptions that have to do with
uh people who are likely to go to
college. Those cultural assumptions um
are very cosmopolitan.
Uh they are very literate. Uh they are
um uh very very inclusive
um at least on on the surface. Uh but
they tend also to be prejuditial um
against people who do not have or from
families that are not college educated.
Um there is a I certainly found this uh
at Harvard to a lesser extent at
Brandeise. I don't really find it at at
Berkeley very much. Uh but uh there
there is a kind of u cultural snobbery.
Um it's it's it's it's wrong to call it
progressivism or liberalism. That's not
where the problem to the extent that
there's a problem. That's not really
where it lies. uh it really lies in uh
in a kind of a um
in the in the culture of inequality in
which we now find ourselves as a as a
country. Um I think the best way of
overcoming that is to make it possible
for either everybody to go to college uh
or to reduce the demands that people go
to college. I've said this over and over
again. I think it's a it's a terrible
conceit that the only way the only
avenue to get into the middle class
today is through a four-year college
degree. Uh my son Sam, for example,
dropped out of high school. U
and and I think that we are intolerant
as a society. Too intolerant.
>> What What was your reaction when your
son said he was dropping out of high
school?
>> I was I was floored. uh very very
worried for him, very anxious. Um but
Sam said, "Don't worry, Dad. I I I know
what I'm doing. I'm going to make videos
for the internet." And that was a time
in the
>> right. And he said, "Great."
>> But I said, "No, no." I said, "First of
all, the internet and videos are two
separate industries. They'll never come
together. You don't know what you're
doing. Uh and if you don't have a
college degree, you know, you're going
to be in deep trouble." How long did it
take for you to feel secure in the
decision that he'd made?
>> Um, a few weeks.
>> Oh, because um Sam has
enormous presence of mind and and wisdom
uh and and responded to every one of our
concerns uh very in a very sophisticated
way. Who who do you talk to when you're
looking for people to uh present
opposing opinions opposing uh opinions
from your own?
>> Well, I I have some and have had some
wonderful friends. Alan Simpson was one
of my dearest friends.
>> The former senator from Wyoming.
>> The former senator from Wyoming
>> who died not that long ago.
>> Yes. When we were together, we mixed
humor and serious discussions. uh and he
viewed the
viewed public policy in very different
ways than I did. I mean, for example, he
was a deficit hawk. Uh I was never a
deficit hawk. Uh but in our
conversations, we laughed and we asked
each other serious questions and we
traded anecdotes uh and stories and
sometimes we discovered uh things that
we didn't know. Um, and I uh well I I I
wish there were more people like Alan
Simpson.
>> Yeah. Um, did he change your mind about
anything?
>> He did. Um,
I was out in Wyoming visit visiting him
in Cody um, a few years ago. uh after
the
Trump administration had begun and after
Trump had um done his Trumpish Trumpian
things started to do them. Um and uh he
invited many of his friends and family
to a dinner. Um and I was surrounded by
Republicans. I mean I don't think I'd
ever been to a this was 12 or 15 maybe
there were 20 people around a table.
They were all Republicans and some of
them were Trumpers. Um and they were, I
think it's fair to say, absolutely
lovely uh people. Um generous and kind
and and totally enjoyable. And I think
that Allen uh taught me uh that the
humanity of of people in Wyoming and and
in the center of this country and and
many many many Republicans uh is so much
more important than uh whether they
believe in uh social security.
After the break, Robert Rich and I sit
down in person in New York to talk about
why Zoron Mamani has struck such a
chord.
[Music]
>> Hi, Robert.
>> Hello, David.
>> Thank you for coming into the studio.
It's rare that I speak with someone
remotely for the first conversation and
then do it in person in for the second.
So, I'm glad you're here.
>> Thank you. So, you know, we're uh
talking just a couple days after Zorant
Mamani won the Democratic primary, and
it was interesting. I was just looking
at some sort of very early uh post
election result data, and I saw that,
you know, he he won all over the city.
He won all different types of people,
but it seems like Andrew Cuomo
outperformed him with lower income
voters despite the fact that Manny's
whole shebang was affordability. Um,
what might explain that?
>> Well, this is the old saw. Um, you know,
lower income voters tend not to
read everything and uh absorb every
piece of news and they tend to be very
impressed by the major endorsers. You
know, Bill Clinton uh endorsed Andrew
Cuomo. Um I endorsed, you know, Mandani,
but nobody paid attention to that
obviously. So, I I think that
um even though he talked about
affordability a lot,
um it didn't that did not necessarily
break through with low-income voters. Um
had he not talked about affordability, I
think he would have done much worse even
with low-income voters. You know, it's
it's interesting to hear you say that
because um you know, my uh colleague on
the show, Lulu Garcia Navaro, earlier
this year, she interviewed the uh
Democratic Senator Ruben Ggo, and he
made a point that was basically um that,
you know, Americans don't necessarily
begrudge the wealthy because they too
would like to be wealthy. and uh
Democratic messaging perhaps misses that
fact uh in favor too much of sort of
like a eat the rich philosophy. Um do
you think there there's something to
that that sort of democratic messaging
isn't taking into account like the the
aspect of the American ethos that
involves aspiring to being wealthy?
>> No, that's bull that's utter
Um I mean it may have been the case. I
think it probably was the case in the '
60s, '7s, 80s, maybe even early 90s when
the gap between the wealthy and
everybody else was not in, you know, a
chasm or chasm. But, uh, it it's now
utterly ridiculous, uh, to make that
that point. I mean, the idea that,
uh, the American dream is still alive
uh, is is for most people uh, a sham. I
mean, they understand it's a sham. They
understand that uh hard work and uh
obeying all of the rules is not going to
get them much particularly since the the
financial crisis of 2008. They saw the
the banks get bailed out uh you know
millions of them did not lost their
jobs, their savings, their homes. Um
Obama had a almost no program for uh
helping homeowners who were underwater
and they're angry about the system, the
system being rigged against them. They
know it is.
>> And you know the
idea that sort of the the the game is
rigged, the system is rotten and
therefore we need uh sort of
outsider candidates to come and shake
things up. Um is is one that has worked
well for Trump. Also seems like it
worked for Zoran Mdani. Um, do you think
there are uh lessons that the Democratic
establishment
should learn from M Donniey's success
and also what's the likelihood that they
will learn those lessons?
>> Completely different questions. Um, yes,
they should learn. Um, now
the caution obviously is that we can't
generalize too much from one success. Um
but uh a young and charismatic candidate
uh who
uh appeals not only to young people but
has a very broad range of appeal uh in
terms of the diversity that's America uh
that speaks to the economic needs of of
Americans uh someone who understands
that 70% of Americans are living
paycheck to paycheck and are just one
paycheck away from uh some real pain in
their lives. Uh that's a kind of
candidate uh who uh is and should be uh
a featured aspect of the Democratic
party. the Democratic Party really can't
move in a positive direction uh if it's
dominated by corporate Democrats uh who
uh would just want to protect uh big
corporations and the wealthy uh or even
the college educated. Um now the second
part of your question is will will the
Democrats uh David I've been uh as you
now know because you've looked at some
of my writing I've been saying much the
same thing for 40 years. I it's a you
know I'm embarrassed by how much uh
repetition
>> you're a onetrick pony.
>> Well I I would I I I admit to that but I
think it's an important trick.
>> Yeah. I think it was your your 79th
birthday recently
>> and I got your newsletter. you were
talking about turning 79 and and the
newsletter took the form of a Q&A
exchange
>> was with some of my young graduate
students
>> and one of the the questions uh in there
sort of centered on you being grouchy uh
because uh using the language from from
the newsletter everything you've worked
for your entire life has gone to
and you know your answer is like there's
that uh
>> I didn't on
But do is that really how you feel?
>> No, it was s it was a a bad joke. Um and
my students laughed at that point, but I
think we're at a very perilous point uh
in our history. Uh I I worry that we're
not taking it as seriously as it should
be taken. We we have to acknowledge that
this is uh extraordinarily dangerous. We
have a president who
continues to lie about very big things
and and also scapegoat uh people uh and
institutions
uh and uh undermine social trust uh and
this is this is a you know if you can if
you if you can talk about sinful
behavior in the terms of public office
this is the core of sinful behavior.
>> Um, so you had shared this story last
time about um going to a dinner party at
the home of your late friend, the
Republican Senator Alan Simpson, and how
you were sort of pleasantly surprised by
the fact that these Trump supporters who
were there with you turned out to be
lovely people. Um but is there some
point at which you know people stop
being lovely if they also support a
politician who you see as sort of a
detestable bully? Like when when does
that become complicated and good?
>> When does that become tension? I think
uh I would s I I would guess that most
Trump supporters uh are are good people
and nice people and they probably uh are
are have you know love their families
and they are patriotic. Um but um they
have been sold a bill of goods by a con
man by a malignant narcissist um who has
come along at at a very dangerous point
in this country's history. Um and uh I'm
not blaming them. I don't blame anybody.
I mean I I think that I blame I
certainly blame Trump and the uh his
lackey and the people around him and and
Republicans in the House and the Senate.
I can't imagine what they tell each
other or even or tell themselves in the
morning when they're putting their lapel
pins in looking looking at the mirror. I
mean, what what possible justification
can they give themselves uh for uh
continuing to mislead the public as as
as they have
um and they mainly are are working for
uh you know the the oligarchs in this
country. I mean, I have no other word
for it.
>> The Democratic establishment, and I
think to to a certain extent, the
Republicans have this problem of uh sort
of the gerontocracy, the people from
your generation who don't want to leave
the stage. Um, and I I wonder do you
think about whether
or not you continue to be the best
person to
deliver your message or or do you think
about how you might uh um sort of
develop other younger voices? And
>> Absolutely. Yeah, I think about it every
day. I love uh the fact that uh Omdani
is 33 years old and AOC is 35. Um yeah,
we have to have young people. I mean,
I've I've retired from teaching. Uh the
best job I ever had because I felt that
I couldn't do justice uh to the job any
longer. I didn't want to I didn't want
to um give my students less than the
best uh I was capable of. Uh well, why
aren't why don't politicians feel the
same way? Why don't uh others in
positions of leadership feel the same
way? I mean,
>> well, it's others in positions of power
and power. Exactly.
>> Power is difficult to walk away from.
>> Power is seductive. It's hard to walk
away from it. and and for the rest for
younger people it's hard to take the
keys away from the grandparents um uh
but uh those grandparents cannot any
longer do the job we're a different
country
[Music]